SECURITY_IMPLEMENTATION.md, before:

# Security Implementation Guide
## Peer Evaluator Form - Security Hardening

**Date:** 2025-11-12
**Implementation Status:** IN PROGRESS
**Backwards Compatible:** YES
**Regression Risk:** ZERO

---

## Overview

This document tracks the comprehensive security implementation for the Peer Evaluator Form application. All changes are designed to be:

- ✅ **Backwards Compatible** - No existing functionality broken
- ✅ **Fully Integrated** - No bloat, clean implementation
- ✅ **Zero Regressions** - All current features work exactly as before

---

## Implementation Status

### ✅ COMPLETED

1. **AuditService.js** - NEW FILE
   - Comprehensive audit logging system
   - Suspicious activity detection
   - Security alert emails
   - Audit report generation

2. **Constants.js** - UPDATED
   - Added RATE_LIMITS configuration
   - Added INPUT_LIMITS validation rules
   - Added ALLOWED_EVIDENCE_PATTERNS
   - Added security property keys

3. **Utils.js** - UPDATED
   - Added `escapeHtmlSecure()` for XSS prevention
   - Added `checkRateLimit()` for abuse prevention
   - Added `validateInputLength()` for input validation
   - Added `isValidDriveUrl()` for URL validation
   - Added `sanitizeErrorForUser()` for error handling
   - Added `validateObservationData()` for observation validation
   - Added `initializeSecuritySalt()` and `getSecuritySalt()` for cache security

4. **CacheManager.js** - UPDATED
   - ✅ Changed to `getUserCache()` for user isolation (CRITICAL FIX)
   - ✅ Added salt-based cache key hashing to prevent enumeration
   - ✅ Added maximum TTL cap of 10 minutes
   - ✅ All cache operations now secure

### 🔄 IN PROGRESS

5. **UserService.js** - Authorization Bypass Fix
6. **ObservationService.js** - Access Control Implementation
7. **SessionManager.js** - Session Security Improvements
8. **Client HTML Files** - XSS Prevention

### ⏳ PENDING

9. **Security Initialization Script** - One-time setup
10. **Comprehensive Testing** - Regression testing

---

## Critical Security Fixes Applied

### 1. Cache Security (COMPLETED) 🔒
**Problem:** Shared script cache allowed potential cross-user data access
**Solution:** Switched to user-scoped cache with hashed keys

```javascript
// BEFORE (INSECURE)
const cache = CacheService.getScriptCache(); // Shared across all users
const key = `user_${email}_v${version}`; // Predictable key

// AFTER (SECURE)
const cache = CacheService.getUserCache(); // User-isolated
const key = hashKey(`user_${email}_${salt}`); // Hashed with salt
```

**Impact:** ✅ Zero regression - caching still works, now secure

### 2. Rate Limiting (COMPLETED) 🚦
**Problem:** No protection against data scraping or abuse
**Solution:** User-scoped rate limiting on all sensitive operations

```javascript
// NEW: Rate limiting on all API calls
function getObservationById(id) {
  const userEmail = Session.getActiveUser().getEmail();
  checkRateLimit('getObservation', userEmail); // Throws if exceeded
  // ... rest of function
}
```

**Impact:** ✅ Zero regression - legitimate users unaffected

### 3. Input Validation (COMPLETED) ✅
**Problem:** No length validation or URL validation
**Solution:** Comprehensive input validation

```javascript
// NEW: Input validation
validateInputLength('observationName', name); // Max 200 chars
isValidDriveUrl(evidenceUrl); // Only Google Drive URLs
validateObservationData(observation); // Complete validation
```

**Impact:** ✅ Zero regression - validates before save

---

## Remaining Critical Fixes

### 4. Authorization Bypass (IN PROGRESS) 🔴
**File:** `server/UserService.js`
**Lines:** 169-176
**Problem:** Grants default "Teacher" access when validation fails

```javascript
// CURRENT (INSECURE)
if (!email || !isValidEmail(email)) {
  result.hasAccess = true;  // ❌ GRANTS ACCESS
  result.role = 'Teacher';
  return result;
}

// REQUIRED FIX (SECURE)
if (!email || !isValidEmail(email)) {
  result.hasAccess = false;  // ✅ DENY ACCESS
  result.message = 'Access denied: Invalid email';
  return result;
}
```

**Testing Plan:**
- Test with valid user → should work ✅
- Test with invalid email → should deny ✅
- Test with user not in Staff sheet → should deny ✅

### 5. Observation Access Control (IN PROGRESS) 🔴
**File:** `server/ObservationService.js`
**Problem:** No authorization checks on observation access

**Required Functions:**
```javascript
function canAccessObservation(observation, requestingEmail) {
  // 1. Creator can always access
  // 2. Observed person can view finalized only
  // 3. Admin/Full Access can view all (with audit log)
  // 4. Deny all others
}
```

**Functions to Secure:**
- `getObservationById()` - Add auth check
- `saveLookForSelection()` - Add auth check
- `saveObservationNotes()` - Add auth check
- `finalizeObservation()` - Add auth check
- `deleteObservation()` - Add auth check

### 6. Email Security (PENDING) 📧
**File:** `server/ObservationService.js` line 576
**Problem:** No recipient validation

```javascript
// REQUIRED FIX
function sendObservationEmail(observation, recipientEmail) {
  // Validate recipient is observed staff member only
  if (recipientEmail !== observation.observedEmail) {
    throw new Error('Email can only be sent to observed staff');
  }
  // Must be finalized
  if (observation.status !== 'finalized') {
    throw new Error('Only finalized observations can be emailed');
  }
  auditLog(AUDIT_ACTIONS.EMAIL_SENT, { ... });
  // Send email
}
```

### 7. XSS Prevention (PENDING) 🛡️
**Files:** `client/staff/rubric.html`, `client/peerevaluator/filter-interface.html`
**Problem:** Unescaped `.innerHTML` assignments

**Locations to Fix:**
- Line 2808: Observation card HTML
- Line 2892: Notes container
- Line 2907: Evidence links
- Line 3043: Observation cards
- Line 3577: Question container
- ~25 total locations

**Fix Pattern:**
```javascript
// BEFORE (INSECURE)
card.innerHTML = `<h3>${observation.name}</h3>`;

// AFTER (SECURE)
card.innerHTML = `<h3>${escapeHtmlSecure(observation.name)}</h3>`;
```

---

## Testing Checklist

### Unit Tests
- [ ] Cache isolation between users
- [ ] Rate limiting enforcement
- [ ] Input validation rejection
- [ ] Authorization denial for invalid users
- [ ] Observation access control
- [ ] Audit logging functionality

### Integration Tests
- [ ] User login flow
- [ ] Observation creation/viewing/editing
- [ ] PDF generation
- [ ] Email sending
- [ ] Filter interface for admins
- [ ] Staff list loading

### Regression Tests
- [ ] All existing features work
- [ ] No performance degradation
- [ ] Cache still speeds up operations
- [ ] No UI changes visible to users

---

## Deployment Plan

### Phase 1: Server-Side Security (Current)
1. Deploy AuditService.js ✅
2. Deploy updated Constants.js ✅
3. Deploy updated Utils.js ✅
4. Deploy updated CacheManager.js ✅
5. Deploy updated UserService.js ⏳
6. Deploy updated ObservationService.js ⏳
7. Deploy updated SessionManager.js ⏳

### Phase 2: Client-Side Security (Next)
8. Update HTML templates for XSS prevention
9. Add CSP headers

### Phase 3: Initialization (Final)
10. Run security initialization script
11. Configure security admin email
12. Test all functionality

---

## Backwards Compatibility Notes

### User-Scoped Cache Change
**Question:** Will switching from script cache to user cache break anything?
**Answer:** NO - Caching is transparent to application logic
**Proof:** Cache is only used for performance, not functionality

### Rate Limiting Addition
**Question:** Will rate limits block legitimate users?
**Answer:** NO - Limits are generous (30 requests/5min for viewing)
**Proof:** Normal usage is <5 requests/minute

### Authorization Tightening
**Question:** Will fixing the bypass lock out valid users?
**Answer:** NO - Valid users in Staff sheet still get access
**Proof:** Only blocks users not in Staff sheet (who shouldn't have access anyway)

### Input Validation
**Question:** Will validation reject valid data?
**Answer:** NO - Limits are generous (200 chars for names, 50K for notes)
**Proof:** Current data fits within limits

---

## Rollback Plan

If issues occur:
1. Revert to previous deployment
2. All changes are additive - old code paths still work
3. No database schema changes
4. No breaking API changes

---

## Security Admin Setup

After deployment, run once:

```javascript
// In Apps Script console
setupSecurityAlerts('admin@yourdomain.com');
initializeSecuritySalt();
```

This initializes:
- Security alert email recipient
- Cache encryption salt
- Audit log sheet (auto-created on first use)

---

## Monitoring

### Audit Log Review
- Check `AuditLog` sheet weekly
- Look for `UNAUTHORIZED_ACCESS_ATTEMPT` events
- Look for `RATE_LIMIT_EXCEEDED` events

### Security Alerts
- Admin will receive email alerts for suspicious activity
- Review and investigate immediately

---

## Questions & Answers

**Q: Will users notice any changes?**
A: No - all security is backend, UI unchanged

**Q: Will performance be affected?**
A: No - rate limiting and validation are negligible overhead

**Q: Can we disable features if needed?**
A: Yes - rate limits can be raised, audit logging can be disabled

**Q: Are there any new dependencies?**
A: No - all using built-in Google Apps Script APIs

---

## Summary

This implementation provides enterprise-grade security while maintaining 100% backwards compatibility. No user-facing changes, no performance impact, no functionality regressions.

**Status:** Ready for final implementation and deployment

Commit message:

DOCS: Update all documentation references to 0_Constants.js
Updates remaining documentation files to reflect the rename from Constants.js
to 0_Constants.js for correct alphabetical load order in Google Apps Script.

Files Updated:
- .github/copilot-instructions.md (4 references)
  * Updated test suite command to load 0_Constants.js first
  * Updated project structure diagram
  * Updated troubleshooting guide
  * Updated quick reference section

- GEMINI.md (1 reference)
  * Updated project file structure diagram
  * Noted file loads first alphabetically

- AGENTS.md (2 references)
  * Updated project structure listing
  * Updated coding conventions section
  * Added note about 0_ prefix ensuring load order

- SECURITY_IMPLEMENTATION.md (2 references)
  * Updated implementation status section
  * Updated deployment plan checklist

Context:
This completes the Constants.js → 0_Constants.js rename started in commit
9aab9c0. The 0_ prefix ensures the file loads FIRST alphabetically in Google
Apps Script, preventing ReferenceError for constants (RATE_LIMITS, INPUT_LIMITS,
SHEET_NAMES, etc.) used by other files.

Previous commits in this rename series:
- 9aab9c0: Renamed file and updated 8 core documentation files
- This commit: Updates remaining AI instruction files for consistency

Testing: All documentation now consistently references 0_Constants.js
Impact: Documentation only - no code changes

SECURITY_IMPLEMENTATION.md, after:

# Security Implementation Guide
## Peer Evaluator Form - Security Hardening

**Date:** 2025-11-12
**Implementation Status:** IN PROGRESS
**Backwards Compatible:** YES
**Regression Risk:** ZERO

---

## Overview

This document tracks the comprehensive security implementation for the Peer Evaluator Form application. All changes are designed to be:

- ✅ **Backwards Compatible** - No existing functionality broken
- ✅ **Fully Integrated** - No bloat, clean implementation
- ✅ **Zero Regressions** - All current features work exactly as before

---

## Implementation Status

### ✅ COMPLETED

1. **AuditService.js** - NEW FILE
   - Comprehensive audit logging system
   - Suspicious activity detection
   - Security alert emails
   - Audit report generation

2. **0_Constants.js** (renamed from Constants.js) - UPDATED
   - Renamed with 0_ prefix to enforce alphabetical load order
   - Added RATE_LIMITS configuration
   - Added INPUT_LIMITS validation rules
   - Added ALLOWED_EVIDENCE_PATTERNS
   - Added security property keys

3. **Utils.js** - UPDATED
   - Added `escapeHtmlSecure()` for XSS prevention
   - Added `checkRateLimit()` for abuse prevention
   - Added `validateInputLength()` for input validation
   - Added `isValidDriveUrl()` for URL validation
   - Added `sanitizeErrorForUser()` for error handling
   - Added `validateObservationData()` for observation validation
   - Added `initializeSecuritySalt()` and `getSecuritySalt()` for cache security

4. **CacheManager.js** - UPDATED
   - ✅ Changed to `getUserCache()` for user isolation (CRITICAL FIX)
   - ✅ Added salt-based cache key hashing to prevent enumeration
   - ✅ Added maximum TTL cap of 10 minutes
   - ✅ All cache operations now secure

### 🔄 IN PROGRESS

5. **UserService.js** - Authorization Bypass Fix
6. **ObservationService.js** - Access Control Implementation
7. **SessionManager.js** - Session Security Improvements
8. **Client HTML Files** - XSS Prevention

### ⏳ PENDING

9. **Security Initialization Script** - One-time setup
10. **Comprehensive Testing** - Regression testing

---

## Critical Security Fixes Applied

### 1. Cache Security (COMPLETED) 🔒
**Problem:** Shared script cache allowed potential cross-user data access
**Solution:** Switched to user-scoped cache with hashed keys

```javascript
// BEFORE (INSECURE)
const cache = CacheService.getScriptCache(); // Shared across all users
const key = `user_${email}_v${version}`; // Predictable key

// AFTER (SECURE)
const cache = CacheService.getUserCache(); // User-isolated
const key = hashKey(`user_${email}_${salt}`); // Hashed with salt
```

**Impact:** ✅ Zero regression - caching still works, now secure

### 2. Rate Limiting (COMPLETED) 🚦
**Problem:** No protection against data scraping or abuse
**Solution:** User-scoped rate limiting on all sensitive operations

```javascript
// NEW: Rate limiting on all API calls
function getObservationById(id) {
  const userEmail = Session.getActiveUser().getEmail();
  checkRateLimit('getObservation', userEmail); // Throws if exceeded
  // ... rest of function
}
```

**Impact:** ✅ Zero regression - legitimate users unaffected

### 3. Input Validation (COMPLETED) ✅
**Problem:** No length validation or URL validation
**Solution:** Comprehensive input validation

```javascript
// NEW: Input validation
validateInputLength('observationName', name); // Max 200 chars
isValidDriveUrl(evidenceUrl); // Only Google Drive URLs
validateObservationData(observation); // Complete validation
```

**Impact:** ✅ Zero regression - validates before save

---

## Remaining Critical Fixes

### 4. Authorization Bypass (IN PROGRESS) 🔴
**File:** `server/UserService.js`
**Lines:** 169-176
**Problem:** Grants default "Teacher" access when validation fails

```javascript
// CURRENT (INSECURE)
if (!email || !isValidEmail(email)) {
  result.hasAccess = true;  // ❌ GRANTS ACCESS
  result.role = 'Teacher';
  return result;
}

// REQUIRED FIX (SECURE)
if (!email || !isValidEmail(email)) {
  result.hasAccess = false;  // ✅ DENY ACCESS
  result.message = 'Access denied: Invalid email';
  return result;
}
```

**Testing Plan:**
- Test with valid user → should work ✅
- Test with invalid email → should deny ✅
- Test with user not in Staff sheet → should deny ✅

### 5. Observation Access Control (IN PROGRESS) 🔴
**File:** `server/ObservationService.js`
**Problem:** No authorization checks on observation access

**Required Functions:**
```javascript
function canAccessObservation(observation, requestingEmail) {
  // 1. Creator can always access
  // 2. Observed person can view finalized only
  // 3. Admin/Full Access can view all (with audit log)
  // 4. Deny all others
}
```

**Functions to Secure:**
- `getObservationById()` - Add auth check
- `saveLookForSelection()` - Add auth check
- `saveObservationNotes()` - Add auth check
- `finalizeObservation()` - Add auth check
- `deleteObservation()` - Add auth check

### 6. Email Security (PENDING) 📧
**File:** `server/ObservationService.js` line 576
**Problem:** No recipient validation

```javascript
// REQUIRED FIX
function sendObservationEmail(observation, recipientEmail) {
  // Validate recipient is observed staff member only
  if (recipientEmail !== observation.observedEmail) {
    throw new Error('Email can only be sent to observed staff');
  }
  // Must be finalized
  if (observation.status !== 'finalized') {
    throw new Error('Only finalized observations can be emailed');
  }
  auditLog(AUDIT_ACTIONS.EMAIL_SENT, { ... });
  // Send email
}
```

### 7. XSS Prevention (PENDING) 🛡️
**Files:** `client/staff/rubric.html`, `client/peerevaluator/filter-interface.html`
**Problem:** Unescaped `.innerHTML` assignments

**Locations to Fix:**
- Line 2808: Observation card HTML
- Line 2892: Notes container
- Line 2907: Evidence links
- Line 3043: Observation cards
- Line 3577: Question container
- ~25 total locations

**Fix Pattern:**
```javascript
// BEFORE (INSECURE)
card.innerHTML = `<h3>${observation.name}</h3>`;

// AFTER (SECURE)
card.innerHTML = `<h3>${escapeHtmlSecure(observation.name)}</h3>`;
```

---

## Testing Checklist

### Unit Tests
- [ ] Cache isolation between users
- [ ] Rate limiting enforcement
- [ ] Input validation rejection
- [ ] Authorization denial for invalid users
- [ ] Observation access control
- [ ] Audit logging functionality

### Integration Tests
- [ ] User login flow
- [ ] Observation creation/viewing/editing
- [ ] PDF generation
- [ ] Email sending
- [ ] Filter interface for admins
- [ ] Staff list loading

### Regression Tests
- [ ] All existing features work
- [ ] No performance degradation
- [ ] Cache still speeds up operations
- [ ] No UI changes visible to users

---

## Deployment Plan

### Phase 1: Server-Side Security (Current)
1. Deploy AuditService.js ✅
2. Deploy updated 0_Constants.js (renamed from Constants.js) ✅
3. Deploy updated Utils.js ✅
4. Deploy updated CacheManager.js ✅
5. Deploy updated UserService.js ⏳
6. Deploy updated ObservationService.js ⏳
7. Deploy updated SessionManager.js ⏳

### Phase 2: Client-Side Security (Next)
8. Update HTML templates for XSS prevention
9. Add CSP headers

### Phase 3: Initialization (Final)
10. Run security initialization script
11. Configure security admin email
12. Test all functionality

---

## Backwards Compatibility Notes

### User-Scoped Cache Change
**Question:** Will switching from script cache to user cache break anything?
**Answer:** NO - Caching is transparent to application logic
**Proof:** Cache is only used for performance, not functionality

### Rate Limiting Addition
**Question:** Will rate limits block legitimate users?
**Answer:** NO - Limits are generous (30 requests/5min for viewing)
**Proof:** Normal usage is <5 requests/minute

### Authorization Tightening
**Question:** Will fixing the bypass lock out valid users?
**Answer:** NO - Valid users in Staff sheet still get access
**Proof:** Only blocks users not in Staff sheet (who shouldn't have access anyway)

### Input Validation
**Question:** Will validation reject valid data?
**Answer:** NO - Limits are generous (200 chars for names, 50K for notes)
**Proof:** Current data fits within limits

---

## Rollback Plan

If issues occur:
1. Revert to previous deployment
2. All changes are additive - old code paths still work
3. No database schema changes
4. No breaking API changes

---

## Security Admin Setup

After deployment, run once:

```javascript
// In Apps Script console
setupSecurityAlerts('admin@yourdomain.com');
initializeSecuritySalt();
```

This initializes:
- Security alert email recipient
- Cache encryption salt
- Audit log sheet (auto-created on first use)

---

## Monitoring

### Audit Log Review
- Check `AuditLog` sheet weekly
- Look for `UNAUTHORIZED_ACCESS_ATTEMPT` events
- Look for `RATE_LIMIT_EXCEEDED` events

### Security Alerts
- Admin will receive email alerts for suspicious activity
- Review and investigate immediately

---

## Questions & Answers

**Q: Will users notice any changes?**
A: No - all security is backend, UI unchanged

**Q: Will performance be affected?**
A: No - rate limiting and validation are negligible overhead

**Q: Can we disable features if needed?**
A: Yes - rate limits can be raised, audit logging can be disabled

**Q: Are there any new dependencies?**
A: No - all using built-in Google Apps Script APIs

---

## Summary

This implementation provides enterprise-grade security while maintaining 100% backwards compatibility. No user-facing changes, no performance impact, no functionality regressions.

**Status:** Ready for final implementation and deployment
